Catastrophic cascading effects of deoxygenation on coral reef community   


dead zones, global change, Agaricia, photophysiology, microbes, symbiosis
Dissolved oxygen (DO) concentrations in the ocean are declining at an unprecedented rate due to eutrophication and climate change . More frequent acute hypoxic event cause mass mortality of marine life and jeopardize the persistence of ecologically and economically valuable coastal ecosystems . Though these hypoxic event have long been recognized to cause ecosystem collapse in temperate environments, similar consequences have only recently been identified in the tropics , where their effects on coral reef ecosystems remain poorly understood. Here we show that an acute hypoxic event in 2017 caused a rapid and dramatic shift in coral and microbial community on a shallow Caribbean coral reef. coral suffered bleaching, tissue loss, and mortality during the event, which led to a 50% decrease in live coral cover and a significant, persistent shift in the benthic assemblage . The hypoxic water had a unique microbial taxonomic and functional profile that included fewer Cyanobacteria and viruses and higher abundances of marine bacteria indicative of anoxic conditions. Unlike the benthic community, which failed to recover after one year, the microbial assemblage rapidly reverted to a normoxic assemblage with the return of oxygenated water. Our findings demonstrate the potential for acute deoxygenation to rapidly alter coral reef ecosystems, decoupling the ecological trajectories of major functional groups. This emphasizes the importance of incorporating this emerging stressor into coral reef research and management plans to better predict and mitigate escalating threats to coral reef persistence. 


Acute hypoxic event, and the ensuing mass mortality and formation of "dead zones" in coastal ecosystems, are increasing in frequency and severity due to anthropogenic impacts including eutrophication and climate change . Hypoxic event have been well studied in temperate systems, where sudden deoxygenation has caused ecosystem collapse and loss of ecosystem services . However, the effects of analogous event in the tropics remain poorly understood , despite physical characteristics of coral reef geomorphology (e.g., semi-enclosed bays) and hydrology (e.g., restricted water flow) that exacerbate deoxygenation, particularly when coupled with local and global human impacts. Though more than 10% of coral reefs globally are at elevated risk of hypoxic , global change research in these habitats has largely focused on the effects of warming and ocean acidification . 
Coral reefs are ecologically and economically valuable ecosystems in global decline due to decades of accumulating environmental impacts . coral build the physical framework for reef habitats through calcification, supporting ecosystem services that are threatened by the loss of live coral . The survival of reef-building coral is linked to the performance of microorganisms, including their endosymbiotic dinoflagellates  and the reef-associated microbial assemblages that are responsible for the cycling of nutrients and organic materials that facilitate energy transfer and trophic linkages through the "microbial loop" . However, the integrity of these ecological networks and their emergent ecological functions appear vulnerable to environmental change . Recent evidence demonstrates that hypoxic event can decimate coral community in a matter of days . Yet, little is known about ecosystem-scale effects of hypoxic event and subsequent recovery dynamics on coral reefs, in part because episodes of hypoxic typically last just a few days, and oftentimes go undocumented.
The first well-documented assessment of hypoxic on a coral reef followed an event in 2010 in Bocas del Toro, Panama . A handful of other studies have implicated acute hypoxic conditions in coral reef mortality [reviewed in , but there has yet to be a study that quantifies both abiotic and biotic responses during a hypoxic event. Here, we provide the first comprehensive assessment of the initial impacts of a hypoxic event on a coral reef and the resulting community trajectories by documenting the environmental conditions, biological responses of coral and microbes, and changes in reef community structure as the event unfolded and after a recovery period. 

We detected the reoccurrence of an acute hypoxic event in September 2017 in Bahía Almirante on the Caribbean coast of Panama , This was seven years after the first reported hypoxic event in the area, which resulted in mass mortality of virtually all coral below 10-12m at affected site . Both event occurred at the peak of the hypoxic season, when water temperatures are warmest and hypoxic conditions persists at depth (20 m) , but the 2017 event appeared to affect the reef at shallower depths (4-5 m) compared to the 2010 event . We found a distinct isocline persisting on a reef in the inner bay likely from deep hypoxic water shoaling toward the surface in this highly stratified system (Cayo Roldan, hereafter referred to as "impacted site") . Below the cline the benthic was littered with dead, but intact sponges and exposed, immobile, and dying invertebrates . Coral bleaching, tissue loss, and mortality were apparent and widespread within the hypoxic water (Fig 1b,d), along with microbial mats that are diagnostic of anoxic conditions . We characterized the response of the reef , dominated by the reef-building coral Agaricia tenuifolia and branching Porites sp. , at the upper edge of that cline as the event unfolded. 
We conducted a region-wide survey five days after the onset of the event to evaluate the extent and severity of hypoxic conditions and associated environmental parameters. Depth profiles were conducted at 83 site throughout the bay with a YSI multiparameter sonde (DO, temperature, chlorophyll, salinity, pH). Within Bahía Almirante, hypoxic conditions were consistently most severe and stratified in the interior of the bay, farthest from the inlets where bay water exchanges with oxygenated water from the open ocean . We selected two focal site from across this gradient for targeted coral collections and surveys. At the impacted site, DO concentrations in the first meter above the benthic were functionally anoxic (0.18± 0.12 SD mg L-1) and over an order of magnitude lower than at the control site located outside Bahía Almirante (5.47 ± 0.07 SD mg L-1), where reefs are well flushed with open ocean water (Cayo Coral, hereafter referred to as "control site") . Other associated environmental parameters, including temperature, salinity, and chlorophyll varied little between the two site during the sampling period, and though pH varied with DO the magnitude of change was substantially lower . 

Coral bleaching 
We quantified how hypoxic stress induced coral bleaching, a process by which coral expel their endosymbionts, in a representative Caribbean coral, A. tenuifolia (hereafter Agaricia). During the hypoxic event we collected three coral fragments from each of six distinct colonies at each site to measure coral bleaching and photophysiology (N = 18 per site). coral from the impacted site were significantly more bleached than their counterparts from the control site. Symbiont densities, a direct measure of coral bleaching, were 78% lower at the impacted site (linear mixed effects model (LME), P < 0.001) . Maximum quantum yield (Fv/Fm), a measure of photosynthetic efficiency of symbiotic algae and an indicator of coral bleaching , likewise was significantly depressed at the impacted site (LME), P < 0.001) ,  and photosynthetic pigments were 59% (chl a) and 56% (chl c) lower (LME, chl a P <0.001, chl c P < 0.001) . Together, these physiological measurements revealed how conditions associated with an acute hypoxic event triggered coral bleaching, which presaged coral mortality and a persistent shift in benthic  structure.
 
Coral  structure 
We assessed benthic  structure at the impacted and control site four months before, during, and one year after the hypoxic event using permanent photoquadrats (N = 11 per site), and then evaluated changes in  structure at each site those intervals with a permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) and pairwise contrasts. We used nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) to visualize  data, with vectors representing significant correlations at P < 0.05. The benthic  assemblage changed significantly over time at the impacted site (PERMANOVA, P < 0.001) (Fig 2b-c) , where the hypoxic event initiated a dramatic and long-lasting change in  structure (pairwise Adonis, P = 0.006). For example, live coral cover decreased by 50% during the event, from an average (±SE ) of 30 ± 2.8% before to 15 ± 2.7% during the event, which corresponded with an increase in dead and bleached coral . One year later, the benthic assemblage had not recovered (Adonis, P = 0.033), with live coral cover at 23 ± 3.2%. Conversely, the composition of benthic assemblage at the control site did not change over time (PERMANOVA, P = 0.901) . 
To explore contributions of coral taxa in different conditions of health (live-L, dead-D, bleached-B, partially bleached-PB) to the observed assemblage shifts, we also conducted  analyses within the coral assemblage at the impact site. The coral  changed significantly over time (PERMANOVA, P <0.001, Fig 2d ), which appeared to drive the fundamental shifts we detected in overall benthic  structure at the impacted site. As with the whole benthic community, the hypoxic event altered the coral assemblage (Adonis, P = 0.003) and the coral community failed to recover a year later (Adonis, P = 0.012) . These changes were driven by shifts in the relative abundance of live, bleached, and dead coral of the 2 dominant genera which together accounted for > 90% of the coral habitat ). Initially, live Agaricia comprised 27% of total available coral habitat (dead = 3%, no bleaching) and live Porites comprised 58% (dead = 3%, no bleaching) . During the event, live Agaricia decreased to <1% of total coral habitat and Porites to 32%, while dead Agaricia and Porites accounted for 22% and 19%, respectively, and bleached accounted for 12% for each taxa (full and partial bleaching combined). Notably, one year after the event there was no evidence of bleaching, and only 5% of available coral habitat was live Agaricia and 44% was Porites, while 9%  was dead Agaricia and 28% was dead Porites . 
Our results illustrate the ecosystem-scale effects of hypoxic-induced coral mortality on benthic community structure, and the gradual recovery of live coral cover reveals how a days-long hypoxic event can have lasting consequences for coral reef ecosystem structure that directly influence ecosystem functioning.  

Microbial community composition
We characterized microbial community from three 1 L water samples collected 0.5 m above the benthic at each site during the hypoxic event, and again a month after the hypoxic event.   16S rRNA sequencing revealed a shift in microbial community composition from normoxic to hypoxic conditions, with 111 differentially abundant (DA) amplicon sequence variants (asv)  identified between the hypoxic and normoxic samples . Hypoxic community were enriched in 43 asv that were largely absent in normoxic samples including: ASV3, ASV11, and ASV13 (Rhodobacteraceae); ASV7, ASV16, ASV26, ASV27, and ASV30 (Nitrincolaceae); ASV5 (Saprospiraceae); and ASV10 (Arcobacteraceae) . At the broader community level, hypoxic community showed a marked decrease in Cyanobacteriia, SAR406, and Acidimicrobiia. Notably, microbial community at the impacted site recovered rapidly. Within a month of the event, following the return of oxygenated water, the microbial community at the impacted site closely resembled those of normoxic conditions at the control site .  
We conducted shotgun metagenome sequencing on one sample from each site and sampling period (N = 4 total). Taxonomic analysis of short reads showed similar patterns of diversity as the 16S rRNA data, specifically an increase of Campylobacteraceae (classified as Arcobacteraceae in the 16S rRNA database) and Rhodobacteraceae in the hypoxic sample and a decrease of Cyanobacteria . Metagenomic analysis also showed a decrease of viral reads in the hypoxic sample . Co-assembly of metagenomics reads, followed by automatic binning and manual refinement, revealed 34 microbial bins and 82 viral bins (≥ 100kbp each). We reconstructed five metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs) . Three were common to both hypoxic and normoxic samples, two of which (MAG01, MAG03) were classified in the family Cyanobiaceae (Cyanobacteria) based on the presence of 22 (out of 22)  ribosomal single copy genes (SCG) from the Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB), while the third common MAG (MAG05) was classified as Pelagibacter based on the presence of 16 SCG and 37 unique markers, respectively. The other two MAGs were found exclusively in the hypoxic sample (MAG02, MAG04) . MAG04 was classified as Aliiroseovarius (Rhodobacteraceae) based on 18 SCG, and MAG02 was classified as Poseidonibacter (Campylobacteria) based on 20 SCG.  
We used a phylogenomic approach to further explore the relationship of MAG02 to other Arcobacter genomes by comparing MAG02 to 72 publicly available Arcobacter genomes (plus Sulfurospirillum outgroups). We constructed a phylogenomic tree from 17 manually curated gene clusters (1,309 total) identified as SCG. Arcobacter genomes grouped into one distinctly terrestrial clade, three marine clades, and one clade that was a mixture of the two environments . MAG02 clustered within a clade of 8 marine-associated genomes described as either Arocobacter or Poseidonibacter, though SCG taxonomy estimates classified all members of the clade as Poseidonibacter. Recent work however argues that the genus Arcobacter should not be split into multiple genera  as previously proposed .  Regardless, genomes in this clade were predominantly associated with marine invertebrate hosts, specifically scallops and abalone (Mollusca), suggesting that MAG02 may normally be host-associated and/or part of the sediment community.  The V4-V5 region of the full length 16S rRNA sequence pulled from the MAG02 assembly matched with 100% identity to ASV10, suggesting that ASV10, an unclassified Arcobacteraceae and one of the dominant asv from the hypoxic 16s rRNA samples, is the same organism as MAG02. 
Functional annotations of genes in MAG02 indicated a total of 32 KEGG modules with > 75% completeness (Table S1), including a complete Sox pathway module. The seven genes of this complex (soxXYZABCD) are involved in the oxidation of sulfur-containing thiosulfate to sulfate, an ubiquitous product of anaerobic processes. The Sox pathway is common in sulfur-oxidizing bacteria (CITE ) and Arcobacter (CITE ) in particular (we found  complete Sox pathways in 63 of the 72 Arcobacter genomes in our analysis). Furthermore, MAG02 contained over half the genes from the reverse Krebs cycle, including a complete pyruvate oxidation (pyruvate to acetyl-CoA) pathway—specifically pyruvate ferredoxin oxidoreductase genes (porABCD)—a near-complete fumarate reductase pathway (frdA, frdB, frdC), 2-oxoglutarate/2-oxoacid ferredoxin oxidoreductase (alpha and beta subunits), succinate dehydrogenase/fumarate reductase, and fumarate hydratase. Finally, MAG02 contained two cbb3-type cytochrome c oxidases (subunits III and IV). Together, these results suggest MAG02 is capable of growing at low oxygen concentrations and fixing CO2 using thiosulfate as an electron. It is also worth noting that cbb3-type cytochrome c oxidases as well as the Sox and pyruvate oxidation pathways, were completely absent from normoxic community, only detected in the hypoxic community. 

Hypoxic effects on coral reef community 
Here we captured the first micro-to-macroscopic community responses of a coral reef to hypoxic as the event unfolded . Hypoxic conditions rapidly triggered coral bleaching, tissue loss, and whole colony mortality in coral taxa at the impacted site. These findings were evident in both physiological measurements from coral collected during the event and visual surveys of coral bleaching and mortality on the benthic. Though the number of studies to implicate hypoxic in mass mortalities on coral reefs is increasing , ours is the first to characterize the bleaching response to conditions associated with a hypoxic event. Thermal stress is the most commonly assumed culprit when coral bleaching is detected, but our study suggests that the role of oxygen-stress also should be considered in future studies of coral bleaching.  
Impacts of the 2017 hypoxic event included a 50% decrease in live coral cover in the shallow reef community. The coral Agaricia appeared to be more negatively affected than the other abundant coral in the shallow reef community, including Porites and Millepora. These results concur with Altieri et al. (2017), which found greater hypoxic-sensitivity in a deeper species of Agaricia (A. lamarkcii) relative to other coral, resulting in a shift, rather than outright loss, of the coral assemblage towards dominance by a more tolerant species . We observed that virtually all coral in the deeper reef community below 10-12 m suffered rapid mortality in 2017 (M. Johnson, personal observation), yet we found that nearly half of living coral in the shallow reef community at the upper edge of the oxycline survived. Higher survival of coral taxa in shallower environments following these event is critical for reef recovery dynamics, because surviving coral may provide a source of larvae to facilitate recolonization and recovery of the deeper reef community. 
Hypoxic conditions altered the microbial assemblage associated with the reef benthic, illustrating that oxygen deprivation impacts macro-to-microscopic community. Notably, we identified a Poseidonibacter (Epsilonproteobacteria) with marine origins that was both dominant and unique in hypoxic conditions, but was absent from an analogous assemblage collected at the same site one month after the event following the return of normoxic conditions. This microbe is grouped with Arcobacter, a metabolically versatile genus that can take advantage of, and thrive in, anoxic water and sediments  and also has been detected in other hypoxic coastal ecosystems . The consistent prevalence of Arcobacter-like microbial taxa in hypoxic conditions ranging from our coral reef samples to the Baltic Sea suggest that it could be used as an indicator to facilitate early detection and characterization of ecological impacts of hypoxic conditions that may last for only days .
We provide new evidence that hypoxic event have the potential to drastically alter ecological structure outside temperate ecosystems, with impacts across multiple levels of ecological organization and that cause persistent devastation to the macroscopic reef community. Coral reefs area already suffering severe losses in response to a range of global and local impacts, and we argue that hypoxic event pose a threat to coral reefs on par with warming event that cause mass bleaching. Thermal bleaching event occur over regional or ocean basin scales, and typically manifest after weeks-to-months of sustained stress. Though hypoxic may occur at the scale of a bay or lagoon, acute event can decimate reef ecosystems in a matter of days , with broader ecosystem-level effects that impact all resident aerobic marine life. Their localized nature suggests that local policy and management practices can be effective at preventing and mitigating their occurrence. However, our study is evidence of how the fleeting nature of hypoxic requires a continuous monitoring program to detect changes in coral reef community. This is essential to enabling rapid scientific responses, developing conservation action plans, and guiding management decisions as the risk of deoxygenation in the tropics continues to climb.

Methods  
Site description
We conducted this study in Bocas del Toro on the Caribbean coast of Panama. Bahía Almirante is a semi-enclosed bay, where circulation with the open ocean becomes more limited with increasing distance from each of two inlets . Conditions characteristic of a low-oxygen event were detected in Bahía Almirante on September 20, 2017. To evaluate the effects of hypoxic conditions on the coral reef community, we collected coral samples for physiological analyses, water samples for microbial community analyses, and environmental measurements at a hypoxic site and at a control site during and after the hypoxic episode. Cayo Roldan ("impacted site") is located at the interior of Bahía Almirante and was the site where hypoxic conditions were first detected, while Cayo Coral ("control  site") is located just outside Bahía Almirante ~30 km away. The control site is continuously exposed to open ocean flushing, and thus, with oxygenated water. Samples were collected 5 days after detection of the hypoxic event, and bay-wide environmental measurements were conducted 6 days after detection of the event.
Environmental conditions
Extensive bay-wide sampling was conducted between 800 and 1730 hrs on Sept. 26, 2017 to evaluate the spatial extent of the hypoxic event . DO, temperature, chlorophyll, salinity, and pH were quantified with a YSI multiparameter sonde with an optical DO sensor (YSI EXO2 & EXO optical DO Smart Sensor; Yellow Springs, USA) at 83 site throughout the bay. For each reported value, the average of multiple measurements made at depths 1 meter above the benthic at each site were taken. Data points were interpolated with inverse distance weighting (IDW) techniques using ArcGIS to visualize the variation in parameters on the sampling day.
Coral bleaching
We collected the reef-building lettuce coral Agaricia tenuifolia from each site on Sept 25, 2017 between 0600-1000 hrs. Scuba divers collected three fragments (~ 4 cm2) from each of six colonies at both the impacted and control site. Once at the surface, fragments were stored in a cooler filled with seawater from the respective site and transported to the wet lab facilities at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI) at the Bocas del Toro Research Station for physiological analyses.
Coral health was assessed by quantifying the maximum quantum yield of each coral fragment using a blue-light Pulse Amplitude Modulated fluorometer (PAM) (Junior Pam, Walz). Samples were dark adapted in the collection cooler for 2 hours, with measurements taken midday. Three measurements were taken from the living tissue of each fragment at ~ 1 cm from the edge. Instrument settings were optimized to yield initial fluorescence readings (F0) between 300-500 units, while minimizing measuring light intensity to reduce actinic effects. The same settings were used for all coral from both site: ML intensity 6, sat pulse 8, frequency 2, width 0.8, gain 1 . The three measurements from each fragment were averaged for one response value per fragment for subsequent analyses. Directly after photophysiology measurements were taken, coral tissue was stripped with an airbrush and filtered seawater (0.7µm) from the underlying skeleton for subsequent analyses of zooxanthellae densities and pigment content. Samples were frozen at -20 °C for subsequent analyses. 
To prep coral samples for laboratory analyses, the coral blastate was thawed, homogenized, and then centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 4 minutes to separate the host coral animal tissue and symbiont fractions. The resulting pellet, containing the symbiotic zooxanthellae cells, was resuspended in filtered seawater, homogenized, and separated into aliquots for cell counts and pigment extractions. Counts were performed with a haemocytometer and compound microscope, with 6 replicate counts that were averaged for each coral sample. Zooxanthellae counts were normalized to sample volume and coral surface area (calculated by wax dipping following Stimson et al. ) to be expressed as cells per cm2. Chlorophyll pigments were extracted from the zooxanthellae fraction of each coral sample in 100% acetone following the methods and equations of Jeffrey and Humphrey (1975) , normalized to coral surface area and expressed as ug L-1.  
Coral response variables were evaluated for normality and homogeneity of variances by visual assessment of residuals, a Shapiro-Wilk test for normality, and Levene’s test for equality of variances. Zooxanthellae densities and pigment concentrations were log-transformed to meet assumptions, and models were conducted with transformed data. Untransformed data are presented in figures to aid interpretation. Response variables were analyzed separately with linear mixed effects models using maximum likelihood, with site as a fixed effects and colony as a random effect, using lmer in the package lme  in R environment version 3.6.2 . Site significance was evaluated with analysis of variance tables generated from type II sum of squares using Satterthwaite degrees of freedom from the package lmerTest .
Coral community structure
Benthic community composition was evaluated before the hypoxic event (May 2017), 2 weeks post hypoxic event (Oct 2017, referred to as during), and one year post event (Oct 2018). Permanent photoquadrat transects at a depth of 4 m were monitored at both the impacted site and control site. Transects span 50 m, with photographs taken of permanently marked plots (0.7 x 1m2 ) every 5 m (N = 11). Image analysis was performed in CoralNet by overlaying 50 random stratified points and identifying the underlying benthic to the finest taxonomic resolution possible. Species were then categorized by functional group. 
Benthic community composition was analyzed separately for each site across the three time points with a permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) with time point as a fixed factor using adonis2 in the R package vegan , and pairwise contrasts were accomplished with pairwise.adonis . Multivariate differences in functional group community composition across time points were visualized with nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nMDS), with vectors representing significant correlations with axes at P < 0.05. 
Microbial community sampling and processing
Seawater samples were collected in sterile Whirl-Pak Bags (4L) ~0.5 meter above the reef at both the impacted and control site on Sept 25, 2017 (during hypoxic) and on Oct 20, 2017 (one month after event) for microbial community analyses. Three water samples were collected per site during the hypoxic event (N = 3 per site), and one sample was collected per site one-month after (N = 1 per site)  . A separate water sample was collected at each site and time point for metagenomics analysis (N = 1 per site and time period). Water was kept in the dark and on ice until filtration at the laboratory. Samples were vacuum filtered through 0.22 µm nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore). Filters were frozen and transported to the molecular facility of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute at Isla Naos Laboratory in Panama City within 6 hours of filtration, and stored at -80 ºC until DNA extractions. DNA was extracted from each filter using a Qiagen Powersoil extraction kit following the manufacturer’s protocol with minor modifications to increase the yield . The V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified (primers 515FB/926R)  and prepared for sequencing following a standard Illumina Amplicon workflow . Metagenomic shotgun libraries were prepared with the Illumina DNA Nextera Flex kit following the manufacturer's protocol. Marker gene sequences and shotgun metagenomics reads were sequenced on two Illumina MiSeq runs (reagent kit version 3, 600 cycles) at the Integrated Microbiome Resource facility at Dalhousie University.
16S rRNA workflow
Primer sequences were trimmed of forward and reverse primers using cutadapt . Sequences were discarded when more than 12% of the bases in the primer sequence were incorrect. Remaining reads were further processed using DADA2 (v1.16.0)  within the R environment . Reads were dropped from the dataset if they had more than three expected errors (maxEE = 3), or at least one base with very low quality (truncQ = 2), or at least one position with an unspecified nucleotide (maxN = 0). Based on visual inspection of quality plots, forward reads were trimmed to 260bp and reverse reads 150bp. Sequences were retained when both reads of a pair passed the filter. Remaining reads were dereplicated before inferring amplicon sequence variants (asv). Paired-end reads were merged and read pairs that did not match exactly across at least 12bp were discarded. Merged reads were then screened for chimeras (method = consensus). Taxonomy was assigned to each ASV using the naive Bayesian classifier  against the Silva_nr_v138_train_set reference database version 138 . Prior to analysis, asv classified as Chloroplast, Mitochondria, or Eukaryota, or that remained unclassified (i.e., NA) at the kingdom level were removed from the dataset using the phyloseq package  in the R environment . 
Microbial asv that were enriched and more frequent in hypoxic and normoxic samples were identified using the Indicator Species Analysis (ISA)  computed with the R package labdsv . asv were considered an indicator of a group if they had a p-value less than or equal to 0.05. We used anvi’o (v6.2-master)  to visualize the distribution of all asv with more than 100 total reads (190 of 1,272 total asv) and overlaid the results of the ISA. Any ASV that was found to be an indicator but had less than 100 reads was not included in the visualization. Hierarchical clustering of both samples and asv were performed using Euclidean distance and ward linkage against the ASV/sample abundance matrix. Results from the ISA were included for each ASV in the visualization, as was Class level abundance for each sample. See the Data and code availability section for information on complete, reproducible workflows and access to raw data, and for the complete reproducible workflow see the project website.
Metagenomic workflow
We used Trimmomatic for adapter clipping and initial quality trimming of raw metagenomic data (N = 4; 1 per site and time period) . Within the anvi’o environment, we built a Snakemake  workflow for co-assembly analysis. In the workflow, we used iu_filter_quality_minoche from the Illumina Utils package for additional quality filtering  and MEGAHIT (v1.2.9) for co-assembly (--min-contig-len: 1000,  --presets: meta-sensitive) . Next, we used anvi-gen-contigs-database to generate a database of contigs and Prodigal (v2.6.3) for gene calling . Within the workflow, KrakenUniq (v0.5.8)  was used for taxonomic classification of short reads against a user-constructed database of archaea, bacteria, viral, fungi, and protozoa reads from RefSeq and the NCBI nt database. Bowtie2 (v2.3.5) and SAMtools (v1.10)  were used to map short reads to the assembly and anvi-profile to create individual profile databases. We then used anvi-merge to generate a merged profile database of all four  metagenome profiles. Taxonomic classification of contigs was performed using Kaiju (v1.7.3, against the nr + euk database)  and VirSorter (v1.0.6, with the –virome flag and aligned using DIAMOND) . 
For metagenome assembled genome (MAG) reconstruction, we conducted an initial automatic binning step with CONCOCT (v1.1.0) , where the number of automatic bins was set to 5. We followed with a series of manual binning steps using anvi-refine to visually inspect and curate each bin by taking into account a) GC-content and taxonomy (based on Kaiju and VirSorter taxonomic profiles), b) mean coverage and detection, c) completion and redundancy assessment of bins based on the occurrence of single-copy genes (SCG), and d) three independent scaffold clustering algorithms (differential coverage; tetra-nucleotide frequency; differential coverage and tetra-nucleotide frequency). We used Hidden Markov model (HMM) profiling of 76 SCG from Archaea , 71 SCG from Bacteria , 83 SCG for Protists (http://merenlab.org/Delmont-euk-scgs), and 12 ribosomal RNAs (https://github.com/tseemann/barrnap) to estimate the completion (C) and redundancy (R) of bins. Bins were considered a MAG if C was greater than 70% and R less than 10%. Any bin where the majority of scaffolds were classified as viral was deemed a viral bin. The distribution of the bins across the four samples was visualized with the anvi’o interactive interface. Hierarchical clustering of bins was performed using Euclidian distance and Ward linkage against the relative abundance matrix. MAG taxonomy was assessed by running the command anvi-run-scg-taxonomy, which uses 22 ribosomal genes from the Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB) to estimate taxonomy . 
Functional annotation of assembled contigs in the metagenome and individual MAGs was performed against KOfam (a customized HMM database of KEGG Orthologs (KOs))  using the command anvi-run-kegg-kofams within the anvi’o environment.   We then used the command anvi-estimate-metabolism  along with the KEGG annotations to reconstruct metabolic pathways (modules) and estimate pathway completeness. Modules completeness  was defined as the fraction of  steps that must be complete in order for the entire module to be marked complete. The module completeness threshold was set at 0.75.  See the Data and code availability section for information on complete, reproducible workflows and access to raw data, and for the complete reproducible workflow see the project website. 
Phylogenomic analysis of MAG02
A phylogenomic approach was used to further investigate the placement of MAG02 within the Arcobacter group because of its association with hypoxic conditions and the higher frequency of Arcobacteraceae in the hypoxic 16S rRNA samples. All publicly available genomes classified in the Arcobacter group (NCBI TaxID 2321108) were retrieved from the GenBank genome collections with the program ncbi-genome-download (https://github.com/kblin/ncbi-genome-download). In total, 124 genomes were retrieved, including species formerly classified as Arcobacter (Aliiarcobacter, Haloarcobacter, Pseudoarcobacter, Poseidonibacter). We removed any genome that had lower completion estimates than MAG02 (92.96% or <66 bacterial SCG) and/or no identifiable near full-length 16S rRNA sequence. These steps removed 22 genomes from the collection. We then used anvi-dereplicate-genomes and fastANI  to cluster genomes at 99% (including MAG02). We selected a representative from each of the 73 clusters and added four Sulfurospirillum (TaxID 5766) genomes as the outgroup for a final collection of 77 genomes. We used the anvi'o pangenomic workflow to define gene cluster and the anvi'o interactive to screen SCG clusters that a) were present in all 77 genomes, b) occurred a maximum of one time in each genome, c) had a maximum functional homogeneity index of 0.90, and d) a minimum geometric homogeneity index of 0.99. This resulted in a collection of 17 gene clusters (1,309 genes) for phylogenomic analysis. The command anvi-get-sequences-for-gene-clusters was used to retrieve, align (performed using MUSCLE v3.8.1551) , and concatenate target gene sequences for each genome. For phylogenomic reconstruction, we used IQ-TREE 2  and ModelFinder Plus  to choose a suitable substitution model, which selected LG+F+R4 as the beset-fit model (out of 49 protein models tested) based on Bayesian information criterion (BIC). We subsequently ran this model with 5,000 ultrafast bootstrap approximations with UFBoot 2  on the curated collection of genomes and SCG. 
Habitat fidelity of relatives of MAG02 was evaluated based on metadata of each genome in NCBI’s BioSample database. Each genome was assigned to a broad habitat category (vertebrate host, invertebrate host, marine surface, marine subsurface, fuel cell, and sewage) based on the host and isolation source (one genome had no information on isolation source or host). Vertebrate hosts almost entirely encompassed terrestrial animals such as cow, duck, human, and pig, and isolations sources like aborted fetus (not human), blood, eye, skin, and slaughterhouse. Invertebrate hosts were exclusively marine and included mussel, oyster, abalone, scallop, and clam. Marine surface sources included seawater and surface seawater, while marine subsurface sources included sediment and marine subsurface aquifer. Fuel cells were isolates obtained from fuel cell enrichment. The sewage category sources were of terrestrial origin and also included wastewater and reclaimed water. See Supplementary Table 1 for a metadata record of all genomes used.   
To further explore the relationship of MAG02 with Arcobacter relatives, near full-length 16S rRNA sequences were retrieved from all genomes using the command anvi-get-sequences-for-hmm-hits, with the –return-best-hit flag and aligned with MUSCLE. We again ran IQ-TREE (v2.0.3) with ModelFinder Plus, which selected TVM+F+I+G4 (out of 30 DNA models tested) as the best-fit model based on BIC. We subsequently ran this model with 5,000 ultrafast bootstrap approximations using UFBoot2  on the curated collection of genomes and SCG. 

Figure Legends
Fig 1. Dissolved oxygen concentrations during the 2017 hypoxic event in Bocas del Toro, Panama. (a) Map illustrates DO concentrations at the benthic on Sept 25, 2017, 5 days after initial detection of hypoxic conditions. Coral bleaching (white arrows) was evident at only the impacted site (Cayo Roldan-white triangle) in a range of coral taxa including (b) Agaricia and (d) Orbicella, which typically progressed from the bottoms to the tops of boulder coral. (c) Microbial mats (red arrow), diagnostic of anoxic conditions, were abundant and (e) invertebrates, including cryptic brittle stars, attempted to flee hypoxic conditions by climbing to the top of mounding coral. An unaffected coral reef (Cayo Coral-black triangle), located outside Bahia Almirante, was used as the control site.

Fig 2. Effects of hypoxic on coral bleaching and community assemblage. (a) Box plot showing symbiont densities Agaricia tenuifolia during the hypoxic event from the impacted site and the control site, with data points (colony means) overlaid. Lower densities directly indicates coral bleaching (red arrow). (b) Stacked bar chart of the percent cover of total coral substrate corresponding to each coral taxa and health condition (L-live, B-bleached, PB-partially bleached, D-dead) at the impacted site 4 months before, during, and one year after the hypoxic event. There were no differences in benthic cover of the coral community at the control site. (c) nMDS 
plot of  the benthic community assemblage at the impacted at the scale of functional group for the whole community (left) and for only the coral community (right). Ellipses indicate the 95% CI around the mean community assemblage before the event (blue), during the event (red), and after the event (green). Arrows indicate significant contributions of functional groups to the benthic community. (d) nMDS of benthic functional groups at the control site. There was no change in the benthic community at the control site over the duration of the study.

Fig 3. Microbial assemblages of hypoxic and normoxic samples. (a) Community composition determined through 16S rRNA sequencing of water samples from the impacted site (vermillion) and the control site (blue) during the hypoxic event (N = 3 per site) and one month after the event (N = 1 per site). Hierarchical clustering of samples (right dendrogram) and asv (top dendrogram) were based on Euclidean distance and ward linkage against the ASV abundance matrix. Each vertical line in the plot area represents a unique ASV, and color intensity indicates the log-normalized abundance of an ASV in a given sample. No color indicates an ASV was not detected. The colored bar below the plot area indicates which asv were enriched in the hypoxic (vermillion) vs. normoxic (blue) conditions as determined by Indicator Species Analysis (CITE?). No color indicates asv that were not differentially abundant. Taxonomic profiles show the proportion of major bacterial classes for each sample. (b) Results
of binning four co-assembled metagenomic samples, two from both site. Each layer represents a sample colored by oxygen conditions, and each spoke a distinct bin. Inner and outer layers provide information on the length and GC content, as well as completion and redundancy estimates, for each bin. Bar charts (right) show the total numbers and percent of reads mapped to the co-assembly, the number of single nucleotide variants (SNVs), a and taxonomic content for each sample. The top and bottom semi-circles show the 44 microbial bins and 92 viral bins, respectively. The five MAGs recovered from the assembly are overlaid, and include the completion (C) and redundancy (R) estimates based on HMM profile of 71 bacterial single copy genes. For each MAG, the genus-level taxonomy estimate is included, based on a collection of 22 ribosomal genes from the Genome Taxonomy Database (GTGB) (CITE?). Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of GTGB ribosomal genes found in each MAG. ASV10 has a 100% match across its entire length to the 16S rRNA gene sequence retrieved from MAG02 (yellow arrow). 

Fig 4. Coral reef community assemblage shifts under hypoxic. Conceptual figure of the changes in the microbial assemblage and benthic reef community during and one month after the 2017 hypoxic event on the Caribbean coast of Panama (Bocas del Toro) at the impacted (left panels) and control site (right panel). The abundance of microbial taxa depicted in the water column is directly proportional to the contribution of each class to the community taxonomic 
profile determined through shotgun metagenome sequencing of water samples at each site and time point (top, horizontal stacked bars). The proportion of coral habitat that was live, bleached (partial and full pooled), or dead is depicted in the benthic community, and based on the bottom horizontal stacked bars. Dissolved oxygen concentration is represented by the arrow, red = hypoxic at ~0.2 mg L and blue = normoxic at ~6.5 mg L. The hypoxic event precipitated a dramatic shift in microbial community composition, a loss in live coral cover, and a shift in the benthic assemblage that persisted for at least one year after the event. No changes in either community-level were detected at the control site at the same sampling points. Figure created by Amanda Dillon, Aline Design LLC.


